[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Have you ever had the notion
that you could run on 100% all
the time or skate through
life without slowing down?
Perhaps the real path to
unlocking our hidden potential
requires us to take a step
back every now and then
and take a much needed breath.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Welcome back to "Limitless."
Today, we're talking about an
extremely crucial part but also
a very forgotten aspect of
unlocking our hidden potential.
And that is forgiveness
and self-care.
I like what Anne Lamot said.
"Everything will work
again if you unplug it
for a few minutes,
including you."
Everything you do all
moments of the day
are taking some kind
of toll on the body.
Breathing, resting,
even relaxing,
you're resisting gravity.
You're metabolizing.
And all of this has a certain
form of upkeep that it needs.
Things are always
going on regardless
of how much effort you think
you're putting into the moment.
And all those moments truly
take a little bit of time,
at least a little bit of
upkeep, to replenish ourselves.
Even psychological
events, as much
as we think that it's not
physical, it's not material.
It shouldn't matter.
But psychological
events also take time
to integrate themselves.
So we need to give
ourselves this time.
This is self-care.
The real essence
of self, I believe,
is finding that inner parent.
We've seen that
parent in action.
We've seen the
love that they can
bring to the moment, the
understanding, the tenderness.
Well, this is what
we need to bring
to our bodies and our
minds, viewing them
as our own children, loving
them, allowing them to be
exactly who and what they are.
Force is not required
in these moments.
In fact, force will
harm that process.
So only time, real presence
in that time, and real care
is needed.
A lot of people in
this world today
think self-care is
a luxury, something
that when you have a vacation
or enough money, then
you can focus on self-care.
This is not true.
Self-care is essential
for our baseline health.
And I'll show you how.
We've all heard of stress.
We've even talked
about it on this show.
What are the effects of stress?
Most people in developed
countries experience stress.
In fact, 3/4 of
American citizens
say they experience
stress every single month.
One third of Americans say
they experience extreme stress.
And the leading
cause of this stress
is seen as money and work.
Going even deeper, workplace
stress costs $300 billion
a year in health care
annually in the US alone.
Roughly half the population
says that they experience
restlessness,
staying up at night
not being able to
sleep simply because
of how stressed they are.
And this has led to roughly
50 million prescriptions
in 2008 being filled for
sleeping pills like Ambien
or $600 million being spent
on things like melatonin
or valerian root just to
help people try to get back
to center, just so
they can sleep and face
another day of work.
This is how stressful
it's becoming.
In fact, in very real
terms, stress and not
being able to
recover from burnout
has reached epidemic levels
in the US and the UK.
But this is the
world we live in.
This is 21st century normal.
We can't avoid this
economic rat race.
It's inevitable, right?
Well, what I aim to
show you is that there
are ways that we can alleviate
stress and still stay just
as productive.
There are very simple
hacks or tools.
And then there are very
involved hacks and tools.
And I'll share both with you.
But these tools are meant
to be seamlessly integrated
into your day.
This first method that
we're going to show you
is very simple, very easy, and
it creates a chemistry shift
in your body that is very
similar to that which,
if you were ever held or coddled
and nurtured as a little child,
those chemicals that flooded
through your body back then
are the same that this
self-care routine will
help your body get back to.
But I won't be
showing it to you.
It'll be Dr. Mario
Martinez in an episode
of "Inspirations" with Lisa Garr
called Rewriting the Genetic
Code.
>> I had a Tibetan Lama teacher
who taught me the technique.
In their world, it's moving the
chi, moving the energy around.
In our world, you're
actually creating immunity,
and you're creating
some kinds of changes
in your endocrine system.
So we have a lot to
learn from their ways.
And they have a lot
to learn from us too.
We've taught them what we
can do with functional MRIs
and how the brain
shifts and all that.
But basically, what
they're doing is
they're moving, creating,
what they call chi.
Put your hands like this.
And you're creating a
sense of cohesiveness.
And you could call it chi.
It doesn't matter.
You do this for a few minutes.
And then what you do is
you put your arms gently
over your shoulder crossed and
then go forward nine times.
And you're going
to begin to feel
some movement, some warmth.
And then after 9, 10 times,
then you go backwards like that.
And then after you
finish, you stop and then
feel what's happened.
Feel what's happened with--
you feel some energy change.
Now what have you done
psychoneuroimmunologically?
First, you created
a placebo effect.
This is something
that's going to work.
Second, the touching
releases some--
>> Oxytocin.
>> Oxytocin and all kinds of
other things that are going on.
You're beginning to feel the
effect of when your grandmother
touched you and loved you.
And so all of that
has a healing effect.
Psychoneuroimmunologically
it has a healing effect.
But the Tibetans
know how to do it.
But they don't know the
biochemistry behind it.
And you do it.
And it works.
And there's a
method that I teach.
It's not just an
intellectual process.
You have to find out
what wound it cost.
Because across cultures, I found
that there are three wounds.
I call them archetypal
wounds because you see them
in every culture, shame,
abandonment, and betrayal.
So you have to find out
if somebody was predatory
with you, what did they do?
Did they abandon you?
Did they betray you?
>> Betray you, right.
>> Or did they shame you?
And each of them has a
different biochemical process.
Shame has a lot of inflammatory.
Many of autoimmune
illnesses have
some kind of a shame trauma.
>> So what I gather from
this is we are the medicine.
The medicine is
within us as if there
is a pharmaceutical
dealer inside of us
that every time we decide
to show shame, guilt, fear,
anxiety, that there is a unique
chemical cocktail that it will
produce and flood
through the system,
setting off biological
processes that
are hazardous to our
body and our mind.
And truthfully, self-care
is a feminine quality.
It's very receptive.
You're listening to your body.
You're allowing your
body to express itself
the way that it wants to,
not conditioned by culture
or society, but
simply being what
it wishes to be in the moment.
And you're listening to that.
That's the feminine
quality of it.
One aspect of this is being able
to take a little bit of time
away from work or the
stressors in your life
to be able to gain
some perspective,
put things in a perspective
so you can understand
what is this all in service to?
Why am I working so
hard to begin with?
This is very important.
And also a very crucial
aspect to self-care
is being able to ask very,
relevant poignant questions,
but then being silent
enough, patient enough,
inquisitive enough to listen
for how your body might respond
because you can't assume that
you know how your body speaks.
We've gotten into this
in this series before.
So what we're doing
to enter into a deeper
relationship with our body
so we can bring it the love
and nurturing that it needs
is to ask relevant questions.
What do you need?
What's happening
inside you right now?
What can I do for you?
And then once you
ask those questions,
giving yourself the space,
the time, and the silence
to be able to listen for
how your body might respond.
Here's one way to put this
into action immediately.
I think it's the quickest,
fastest biohacking tool
you will ever find.
And it changes your
chemistry within minutes.
It's a simple smile.
If you smile in the mirror
for a couple minutes,
it will change your chemistry.
You will feel happier.
But it may not be that
easy to see at first.
You may have to really try.
So this is where you put
that listening into action.
You give yourself a smile.
You smile in that mirror.
Try and make it as
authentic as possible.
Think of things that make you
happy, make you feel content
and fulfilled.
Smile and then listen
for how the body responds
to that little
self-care routine.
And if you think you can't,
if you think you can't smile,
it's too hard, the stresses
of the day are too much,
then I invite you to
take into consideration
what Thich Nhat Hanh said.
He said, "Sometimes, your joy
is the source of your smile.
But sometimes, your smile can
be the source of your joy."
Now I'm going to move on to
the next self-care routine.
And I believe this is
probably the most important
self-care routine
you can abide by.
And it's forgiveness.
So to put forgiveness
into a better context,
better than I could,
I'll throw it off
to Stephen and Ondrea Levine
on an episode of "Omega" called
Relationship--
A Pathway to Self-Discovery.
>> So we will talk to a group
to just to display to them how
much we hold on
to our suffering,
how much our wound
is our identity.
We'll say to a group, now
everyone in this group
is forgiven for everything
they've ever done.
And it's true for the
people who are watching.
You are forgiven for
everything you have ever done.
Every miscreant act, every
moment of foolishness,
of forgetfulness,
you're forgiven.
And you'll see the
group start to smile.
And then you'll
feel that hardness,
that hardness in the belly,
that grimness in the jaw.
You can see how people are
so reluctant to relieve
themselves, to release that
suffering of their guilt.
They start to think who
are you to forgive me?
They resist forgiveness
at every level.
We resist letting
go of our pain.
We think we are our pain.
And then we bring
that identity of I
am my pain to a relationship.
So you have twice
as much pain instead
of twice as much healing.
>> Mark Twain once said,
"Forgiveness is the fragrance
that a violet sheds on the
heel that has crushed it."
That's very beautiful.
And what I believe that
means is forgiveness
is something that is crucial
in our self-care routine
regardless of what we're
forgiving, regardless
of the harm that was
brought to us or others.
So why is it that we
hold onto so much pain?
We have all this
pain from things
that we could have
done better, things
that we wish we would have done,
wish we would have not done.
And all this pain adds up.
And we hold it like
bags of bricks.
But why do we hold it?
Why do we not just set it down?
What is it about our
pain that we have not
learned enough from yet?
Well, I'd like to give
you a quote from Arnold
Schwarzenegger.
"The pain that
you hold is yours.
There is not a single
pain quite like it.
Nobody else on God's green
earth can feel this pain
or have the indescribable
feeling of pride you
will have when you overcome it.
This pain is not your curse.
This pain is your privilege."
Very good point.
Our pain is not just our own.
We're not the only ones who
have to deal with our pain.
We live in an
interconnected world.
Our pain shows up in our
relationships, friends, family,
loved ones, colleagues,
you name it.
Our pain cannot truly be hidden
as much as we think it can.
So trying to hold on to
this pain does not serve us.
It is not part of
our human potential.
We should learn how
to set the pain down.
So to do this, I want to show
you an episode of "Waking
Infinity."
I was traveling
around the world,
and I interviewed this
beautiful couple, Foster
and Kimberly Gamble.
It's not all the things that
they're doing in the world.
It's not all the great
attitudes that they
can bring to other people's
minds through their art.
It's their relationship.
It's the bedrock of
everything they do.
>> And I've just come to realize
that I am way more eloquent,
more effective in my
artistic expression,
when I'm in co-creative
partnership with Kimberly than
I would be on my own.
And she's said the same.
And I think that really speaks
to the dynamic of synergy
where the whole is way more
than the sum of the parts.
And I think that's a
lot of what we're seeing
going on in the world now.
As people are more and
more working on themselves
and fulfilling their own
potential more and more
as an individual,
they're naturally
finding other partners
who are doing the same.
And the next level
of fulfillment
is in co-creative partnership
so that the communication
is a total process.
It actually is
whole and complete.
And that was
absolutely invaluable
and I think one of the reasons
why THRIVE has gone so viral.
>> I find their
words so beautiful.
And truly, self-care, it's
enhanced in our relationships.
Trying to do it solo and
alone doesn't work nearly
as well as it does when we are
in some kind of, as Foster put
it, co-creative partnership.
These kinds of
relationships deeply
mirror us from the inside out.
They also help us renew,
rejuvenate, refresh,
spark new ideas, come up
with solutions to obstacles
that we couldn't come
up with on our own.
That's the beauty
of relationships.
But it does not have to
be a love relationship
or an intimate relationship.
Any kind of relationship truly
works because all relationships
are mirrors.
They show us who we
are, how we behave
in public, when our
thoughts are on or off, how
we're conducting ourselves.
They bring our minds
to our deepest ills
or to our greatest joys
so we can understand who
and what we are better.
People do wish to
see you at your best.
It inspires others when
you are at your best.
But if you're around loved
ones and you just cannot bring
your A game to that moment,
there is no reason to just
throw it all away.
If you can't bring your A
game to your loved ones,
just bring your B game.
They'll forgive you.
They love you.
And this is a way to show
them that despite your stress,
despite all that's going
on, you love them too.
And that's a very crucial
aspect to self-care,
not just loving
yourself, but learning
how to love others
and let them love you.
Truly, what we're talking about
is coming home in our skin,
whether we're at the party
surrounded by people or alone
in wilderness.
Home is where you feel
comfortable in your skin.
So here's some questions
that I invite you to ponder.
Are there situations in your
life where you feel you cannot
fully express yourself?
Are there times where you feel
like you can't be yourself
because of the people
that are around?
You're not allowed
to be truthfully you?
Do you feel like you love
losing yourself in crowds
or hiding yourself in solitude?
And finally, do you feel
comfortable and confident
in your own skin?
Use these questions to
spark a little self-inquiry
and listen for a response.
Now I'd like to take
it to an interview
with a guy named Naudi Aguilar.
I interviewed him, and I've
spoken about him before.
He founded Functional Patterns.
It's a way of moving
your body and integrating
with your environment
seamlessly.
But what he's talking
about has nothing
to do with exercising or
even moving your body.
>> Are you really trying to push
your limits as a human being
on this planet?
And that's not doing
some stupid back bend.
That's not doing some
useless handstand.
It's ultimately
coming down to can I
be OK with myself not feeling
like I have to prove myself
to other people?
That's the real-- that's
the deeper undertones
about Functional Patterns.
I think it was World
War I, they had--
they wanted to send I think
supplies across the battlefield
through these horses.
And these horses started
screaming anytime
they'd start hearing the bombs.
And then they'd run right back
to where they were coming from.
And the soldiers were like,
well, we can't be having this.
So let's tear out
their voice boxes.
So that way they're
not screaming,
and they're not neighing,
then in that regard,
they're just going
to keep running.
That's our logic.
Let's put it to the test.
They go out onto
the battlefield.
The horses can't neigh.
They all die of a heart attack.
What does that particularly
mean for the human species?
If you're not able to
fully express yourself,
are you slowly giving
yourself a heart attack?
Are you slowly destroying
your physiology?
>> That's a very good point
about the real purpose of being
able to express ourselves
and how important it is.
And this doesn't just float
around movement camps.
It also goes all the way back
to the beginning of psychology
to Sigmund Freud who said,
"Unexpressed emotions will
never die.
They're buried alive and will
come forth in uglier ways."
And Oscar Wilde said
it even more pointedly.
"The purpose of life
is self-expression."
So how do we put
this into action?
How do we truly bring all of
this into our day-to-day lives?
I believe the
answer is community.
As I said, relationships
mirror our actions back to us
so we can see who we are through
the lens of another person's
eyes.
Well, community is the
same thing, actually
far more dynamic than just
our relationships around us,
our family and our friends.
And there are many things that
our friends and family will not
say to us.
They'll say, yeah,
you're doing fine.
You're doing great.
Whereas, community might have
no issue with calling you out
on certain things.
The right community is like
a social immune system.
They keep us healthy.
And we keep each other healthy.
Truly, community in this
way is one of the best tools
to arrive at our full potential.
So instead of waiting
for somebody else
to bring the change we wish
to see in the world, the best
us we can bring to the moment
is not just us individually.
It's our whole community.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Now I want to share with you a
personal example of self-care.
The person that I've learned
the most about self-care from
is a man named Rob in the
Page family, a dear friend.
And I was up in Canada
with him working
on a film called "Ungrip."
And he puts it
very pointedly how
he healed from depression,
an estranged relationship
with his kids and his wife.
Let's take a look at a clip
of a film called "Ungrip."
>> Years ago, I was
very materialistic.
I was working hard for
big houses, big cars, lots
of money, that kind of stuff.
And then when I recovered
from my depression,
I realized that life is
all about my relationships,
relationships with
individuals like yourself,
other-- my friends and family,
but also with relationships
with my food or my environment.
Sometimes, I still
struggle with that.
This is a journey.
It's not something that's
open a door, walk through,
you're a changed man.
And this is something
I'll probably
have to struggle with
for the rest of my life.
Every once in a
while, I stumble.
But I see it for what
it is and forgive myself
and just move on.
And that whole entire process
was a lot of hard work,
like it was extremely
painful, took a lot of energy.
But I'm at a point right now
where if I had to do it again,
I would because I learned
so much about myself.
And it positioned me very well
to actually get together again
with my wife.
We were separated
for three years.
We reconciled the marriage.
And we've been going strong
now for almost 10 years.
I believe the solution's
available for anybody,
whether you live in a democratic
society or under a dictatorship
or whatever.
I believe the
solution is simple.
And I believe the solution
is within ourselves.
>> Truthfully, there's nothing
more I can say about self-care.
Self-care is this thing
we need to surrender to.
It's not this activity.
It's not something you force.
It's a natural balancing act
of the way of the universe.
So if you feel that you're
experiencing stress, burnout,
not being able to recover or
relax enough from your stress,
then what you really
need is a taste
of self-care, real, true,
authentic self-care.
So to do this and
employ it in your life,
I have some challenges for you.
The first one is take a drink
of water and take a nap.
If you live in a developed
country, you probably need it.
Secondly, mend a
broken relationship.
Bring forgiveness
into a relationship
that truly needs it.
And the third one,
find your tribe.
Find the group that
you feel alive in,
the one that allows you to
express yourself naturally,
authentically, that
doesn't shame you for who
and what you really are.
Find the others, the
ones that lift you up
and make you more of
who you are meant to be.
Thank you for joining me
so much on this episode.
I hope you take these
messages to heart
and carry them with
you on your path
to unlocking your
hidden potential.
And I'll see you around
next time on "Limitless."
[MUSIC PLAYING]